
29 of 998 DOCUMENTSUS Official NewsSeptember 29, 2016 ThursdayRegulatory update: California Public Utilities Commission;ORA/KWASNY/CPUC , has submitted (A1502009) Response filed by ORA/KWASNY/CPUC on 08/01/2016 Conf# 100359LENGTH: 2378  wordsDATELINE: New York  Sacramento: California Public Utilities Commission has issued the following document (Response):  165791114 BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA In the Matter of the Application of Pacific Gas and Electric Company for Approval of its Electric Vehicle Infrastructure and Education Program (U39E).  Application 15-02-009 (Filed February 9, 2015) THE OFFICE OF RATEPAYER ADVOCATES' RESPONSE TO PG&E'S RESPONSE TO THE JULY 7, 2016 ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE'S RULING IRYNA A. KWASNY Attorney Office of Ratepayer Advocates California Public Utilities Commission 505 Van Ness Avenue San Francisco, CA 94102 Telephone: (415) 703-1477 Email: Iryna.kwasny@cpuc.ca.gov MATTHEW YUNGE Utilities Engineer THOMAS GARIFFO Analyst Office of Ratepayer Advocates California Public Utilities Commission 505 Van Ness Avenue San Francisco, CA 94102 Telephone: (415) 703-1667 Email: Matthew.Yunge@cpuc.ca.gov August 1, 2016 FILED 8-01-16 04:59 PM 1 Pursuant to Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Farrar 's July 7, 2016 Ruling Setting Forth Questions for Pacific Gas and Electric Company and the Joint Settling Parties, the Office of Ratepayer Advocates (ORA) files this response to Pacific Gas and Electric Company's (PG&E) responses to the July 7, 2016 ALJ Ruling. I. BACKGROUND On February 9, 2015, PG&E filed Application 15-02-009, seeking approval of its proposed Electric Vehicle Infrastructure and Education Program ("EV Program"). Some parties filed protests and some filed responses to the Application by March 13, 2015.1 On September 4, 2015, the assigned Commissioner and the assigned ALJ issued a Scoping Memo and Ruling directing PG&E to file and serve a supplement to its application that "must set forth an initial phase of EV charging station deployment, limited to a maximum of 10% of the originally-proposed number of charging stations, to be deployed over no more than 24 months."2 On October 12, 2015, PG&E served its supplemental testimony. The testimony included a program that ostensibly complied with the Scoping Memo and Ruling. PG&E described this as the "compliant" proposal, even though its direct current fast charger ("DCFC") program was scaled to 50% of the original size rather than the required 10%. PG&E also proposed a new, non-compliant program, which PG&E called the "enhanced" proposal. The enhanced proposal would deploy up to 7,530 EV charging stations over 36 months from the date of first construction.3 On October 23, 2015, several parties filed a joint motion to strike those portions of 1 California Energy Storage Alliance, Chargepoint, the City and County of San Francisco, Consumer Watchdog, Green Power Institute, Marin Clean Energy, NRG Energy, ORA, the Technology Network, the California Manufacturers and Technology Association, the Joint Minority Parties, and TURN filed protests. CALSTART, the Center for Sustainable Energy, Clean Coalition, Natural Resources Defense Council, SDG&E, and Shell Energy North America filed responses. 2 Joint Assigned Commissioner and Administrative Law Judge's Scoping Memo and Ruling ("ScopingMemo and Ruling") at 7. 3 Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Supplement to Application Pursuant to Joint Assigned Commissioner and Administrative Law Judge's Scoping Memo and Ruling, p. 1. 2 PG&E's supplemental testimony that reference PG&E's "enhanced" proposal, on the grounds that PG&E's "enhanced proposal" is beyond the scope of this proceeding and is not responsive to the Scoping Memo.4 On November 2, 2015, PG&E filed a reply to the motion to strike. In its reply, PG&E stated that although PG&E disagrees with the motion's arguments on the merits of PG&E's "enhanced" proposal, "the parties to the Motion are free to make those arguments on the record in their testimony and at hearings."5 On the same date, the ALJ issued an email ruling denying the motion to strike, but allowed all parties two additional weeks to prepare responsive testimony. On November 30, 2015, fourteen parties served testimony in response to PG&E's supplemental testimony. PG&E submitted rebuttal testimony on December 21, 2015. On February 1, 2016, PG&E requested the hearings be taken off calendar so that PG&E could explore settlement negotiations. Seven weeks later, PG&E filed the Joint Motion requesting adoption of a settlement. The settlement stated that "PG&E will aim to leverage existing or planned load management pilots and programs, such as the Electric Power Research Institute's "Open Vehicle Grid Integration Platform" and the PG&E and BMW 'iChargeForward' pilot."6 Furthermore, the deployment of electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) in the settlement would be "limited to market segments identified in PG&E's testimony, which include MUDs, workplaces, fleet locations, and public facilities."7 4 Motion of The Utility Reform Network, Marin Clean Energy and the Office of Ratepayer Advocates to Strike Portions of PG&E's Supplemental Testimony. 5 Pacific Gas and Electric Company's Response to Motion of the Utility Reform Network, et al. to Strike Portions of PG&E's Supplemental Testimony, p. 2. 6 Charge Smart and Save Settlement Agreement Regarding PG&E's Electric Vehicle Infrastructure and Education Program Application, A.15-02-009, p. 10. 7 Charge Smart and Save Settlement Agreement Regarding PG&E's Electric Vehicle Infrastructure and Education Program Application, A.15-02-009, p. 4. 3 The Commission held four days of hearings during the week of April 25, 2016. The hearings were held on all 4 proposals filed by PG&E (the original application, the "compliant" proposal, the "enhanced" proposal, and the proposal presented in the settlement entitled "Charge Smart and Save"). On July 7, 2016, the ALJ issued a Ruling directing PG&E to serve answers to questions regarding another PG&E EV program called the iChargeForward pilot program. The iChargeForward is a pilot program run by PG&E and BMW. The pilot tests the ability of BMW i3 electric vehicles in residential locations with a dedicated EVSE to respond to demand response (DR) events. The pilot also utilizes used, or "second life", electric vehicle batteries to respond to demand response signals sent by PG&E. The second life batteries used in this program are used EV batteries from BMW's MINI E Cooper trial. PG&E filed its response to the Ruling on July 21, 2016. The following comments focus on the information presented in PG&E's July 21 response. II. DISCUSSION The PG&E/BMW iChargeForward pilot program is intended to provide some insight into the development of EVs located in single-family residences as DR resources, as well as the utilization of second life EV batteries as stationary storage devices. However, PG&E's responses raise questions regarding how it plans to incorporate the lessons learned from the iChargeForward pilot into its implementation of its proposed Charge Smart and Save Proposal. The issues noted by ORA are as follows: A. PG&E did not answer the ALJ's question regarding equipment ownership. The ALJ's July 7th Ruling directed PG&E to: "Please provide a brief background detailing: a. The structure of the program. b. What equipment involved in the program was PG&E-owned, third-party owned, or customer owned."8 8 ALJ's Ruling Setting Forth Questions for Pacific Gas And Electric Company and the Joint Settling 4 While PG&E's response provided a project summary and a brief explanation regarding the system architecture, it did not provide information on equipment ownership of the EVSE. PG&E only stated in Attachment 2 of its response that it had installed monitoring equipment. PG&E's answer to the ALJ Ruling is nonresponsive and did not explain whether the EVSE associated with the iChargeFoward pilot program is owned by BMW, the EV driver, or PG&E. B. The Applicability of the iChargeForward pilot to the Charge Smart and Save proposal is uncertain based on their respective target market segments. In the Charge Smart and Save Pilot Proposal, PG&E states that it will leverage DR pilots such as the iChargeForward pilot program. However, it's not clear how this would happen since each program looks at different market segments. The target demographic of the iChargeForward pilot program is EV drivers that will have a dedicated Level 2 (L2) EVSE located at their home.9 It is unclear from PG&E's response if a dedicated L2 EVSE is required or preferred in order to successfully implement this DR program. It is also unclear how the lessons learned from the iChargeForward program, which focuses on residential charging at a dedicated EVSE can be applied to the Charge Smart and Save Proposal, which will target charging workplaces and at multiunit dwellings (MUDS). C. The BMW i3 EV charging fleet is not as effective as the second life stationary storage. The iChargeForward pilot requires BMW to provide a minimum of 100 kilowatts (kw) of capacity during a DR event from either a fleet of BMW i3's, from a storage device of second life EV batteries, or from both.10 PG&E's response mentions that BMW Parties, Attachment 1, p. 1. 9 Level 2 EVSE are charging stations that supply power at 240 volts, as opposed to the 120 volt power supplied Level 1 EVSE and the 480 volt power supplied by DCFC. DCFC charges EVs several times more quickly than an L2 EVSE. 10 The EV fleet consists of 92 (initially 96) BMW i3 electric vehicles. These EVs belong to participating customers in PG&E's service territory and are charged at home using an L2 charging station. 5 was able to successfully provide that capacity in 126 out of 134 DR events.11 However, based on a review of PG&E's data, the contribution from the EV fleet was relatively low in comparison to the stationary storage units. Over the course of 134 DR events the EV fleet, on average, provided only 22% of the 100 kw required DR resource.12 Out of 134 DR events called at the time of PG&E's response, participation was low with the average fleet vehicle only participating in eight DR events. This low number appears to be attributed to driver charging behavior, such as whether a particular BMW i3 was charging at the time of a particular DR event or if a participant chose to opt out of participating for a day or for the duration of a single DR event. Also, PG&E claims that the average DR event utilized 9% of the EV fleet, which would be 8 EVs per DR event.13 However, based on ORA's review of the data shown in Figure 9 of PG&E's Attachment 2 of its response, this calculation only counts 85 DR events, not 134 DR events.14 This implies that the EV fleet only contributed in 85 of the 134 DR events and when accounting for all 134 DR events, only five EV's on average contributed per DR event.15 In this case it seems that the more effective method for incorporating EV's in DR programs is to focus on the use of second life EV battery storage and not on interacting with active EV's. Therefore, ORA recommends that at the conclusion of the iChargeForward pilot program, PG&E and BMW provide the DR response results of the second life battery storage usage with DR and EV fleet charging. This information might inform the Charge Smart and Save program and EV activities as a whole. 11 PG&E's Response to ALJ's Ruling Setting Forth Questions Regarding iCharge Forward Pilot, Attachment 2, p. 11. 12 PG&E's Response to ALJ's Ruling Setting Forth Questions Regarding iCharge Forward Pilot, Attachment 1, p. 4. 13 PG&E's Response to ALJ's Ruling Setting Forth Questions Regarding iCharge Forward Pilot, Attachment 2, p. 14. 14 Id. 15 Based on the data provided in Figure 6 of Attachment 2 of PG&E's Response, the total number of individual instances in which a BMW i3 EV participated in the 85 DR events listed is 712. This means that the average number of EVs that participated in those DR events is 8.4. However, if the remaining 49 DR events had 0 BMW i3 EVs. participate, then 712 instances of EV participation in the course of all 134 DR events results in an average of 5.3 EV's participating in each DR event. 6 D. The Roles of Partners in iChargeForward ORA understands that iChargeForward pilot includes several partners, including PG&E, BMW, Olivine, Whisker Labs, and the EV driver.16 In this program, PG&E sends a request for DR, via Olivine, to the servers of an Automobile Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM). The OEM then sends a cellular signal to plugged-in vehicles to delay their charging for the duration of the DR event. The EV driver will then receive a message to their mobile device that allows them the option to opt out of participating in that particular DR event. PG&E should clarify whether and how a similar structure might be used in the Charge Smart and Save program. In particular, PG&E should clarify which entity would make the decision to participate in DR events. This clarification is important because the roles of the partners in the iChargeForward pilot, which focuses on residential charging at a dedicated EVSE, may not be the same in the Charge Smart and Save proposal, which will target multiunit dwellings and workplaces. III. CONCLUSION In summary, ORA's response to the PG&E Response to the July 7, 2016 ALJ Ruling is as follows: [#xfffd][#x201a][#xfffd] PG&E's response leaves out information on EVSE ownership in the iChargeForward pilot. [#xfffd][#x201a][#xfffd] PG&E's response suggests that using a fleet of active EV's may not be as useful as second life EV battery storage. [#xfffd][#x201a][#xfffd] It is unclear how the iChargeForward program structure, particularly regarding the roles of program participants and target demographics, can be applied to the Charge Smart and Save proposal. 16 Olivine is an approved Scheduling Coordinator with the California Independent System Operator. In iChargeForward Olivine serves as the interface between PG&E and BMW with respect to providing DR grid services. Whisker Labs provides a platform for collecting electrical consumption data by using a non-contact power meter at the EV driver's circuit breaker. 7 Respectfully submitted, /s/ IRYNA KWASNY Iryna Kwasny Attorney Office of Ratepayer Advocates California Public Utilities Commission 505 Van Ness Avenue San Francisco, CA 94102 Telephone: (415) 703-1477 Email: Iryna.kwasny@cpuc.ca.gov August 1, 2016  In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2016LANGUAGE: ENGLISHPUBLICATION-TYPE: NewswireCopyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private LimitedAll Rights Reserved
Page  Page  Regulatory update: California Public Utilities Commission;ORA/KWASNY/CPUC , has submitted (A1502009) Response filed by ORA/KWASNY/CPUC on 08/01/2016 Conf# 100359 US Official News September 29, 2016 Thursday 