
17 of 998 DOCUMENTSUS Official NewsSeptember 29, 2016 ThursdayRegulatory update: California Public Utilities Commission; The Utility Reform Network, has submitted (A1502009) Comments filed by TURN - The Utility Reform Network on 08/01/2016 Conf# 100355LENGTH: 2428  wordsDATELINE: New York  Sacramento: California Public Utilities Commission has issued the following document (Comments):  BEFORE THE PUBLIC UTILITIES COMMISSION OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA In the Matter of the Application of Pacific Gas and Electric Company for Approval of its Electric Vehicle Infrastructure and Education Program (U39E).  Application No. 15-02-009 (Filed February 9, 2015) COMMENTS OF THE UTILITY REFORM NETWORK ON PG&E'S RESPONSES TO THE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE'S JULY 7, 2016 RULING REGARDING THE iCHARGE FORWARD PILOT Eric Borden, Energy Analyst Elise Torres, Staff Attorney Marcel Hawiger, Staff Attorney THE UTILITY REFORM NETWORK 785 Market Street, Suite 1400 San Francisco, CA 94103 Phone: (415) 929-8876 ex. 308 Fax: (415) 929-1132 Email: etorres@turn.org August 1, 2016 FILED 8-01-16 04:59 PM 1 COMMENTS OF THE UTILITY REFORM NETWORK ON PG &E'S RESPONSES TO THE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE'S JULY 7, 2016 RULING REGARDING THE iCHARGE FORWARD PILOT I. Introduction Pursuant to the directions in the July 7, 2016, Administrative Law Judge's Ruling Setting Forth Questions for the Pacific Gas and Electric Company and the Joint Settling Parties (ALJ Ruling), TURN provides the following reply comments to the responses provided by PG&E on July 21, 2016. The purpose of the iCharge Forward pilot with BMW (hereinafter "pilot") is "to demonstrate the technical feasibility as well as the value of managed charging of electric vehicles (EVs) as a flexible and controllable grid resource." This provides an avenue through which grid benefits could be realized from aggregating plugged-in electric vehicles and battery systems, EV manufacturers and drivers can receive ongoing revenues over the life of the vehicle, and the upfront vehicle purchase price could be reduced if EV manufacturers can use "second life" batteries as a grid resource. TURN supports the purpose and intent of the pilot, as well as the utilization of EVs and second life batteries as grid resources to reduce system peak demand and provide other renewable integration benefits. However, nothing presented in the pilot findings provides support for large-scale ratepayer subsidy of utility charging infrastructure, especially located in non-residential settings. If anything, the pilot results reinforce the fact that the Commission should be extremely careful about authorizing large-scale ratepayer funding of workplace and public charging infrastructure. In addition, the pilot results demonstrate the following items most relevant to ratepayer subsidy of charging infrastructure: 1. The utility does not need to own any EV charging equipment to utilize EVs as grid resources; 2. TOU rates can effectively incentivize EV drivers to charge off-peak in home settings; and 3. Direct Current Fast Charging (DCFC) should not be expected to provide grid benefits or be utilized for renewable integration. Any conclusions based on the results of this pilot thus far about additional benefits of public or workplace charging demand response would be entirely speculative. As discussed in Section III, all demand response ("DR") events in the pilot occurred at the residence, primarily in the early to 2 late evening, which is not relevant for daytime workplace or public charging.1 Also, signals to increase vehicle load (charging) were not tested as part of the pilot.2 EV response to signals to encourage charging to absorb excess renewable electricity in certain daytime hours in the Fall and Spring is the primary renewable integration benefit EVs could provide, but the pilot does not provide information regarding this potential benefit. II. The Pilot Demonstrates That Charging Infrastructure Does Not Need to Be Owned by Utilities to Derive Grid Benefits from Electric Vehicles PG&E's pilot demonstrates a system architecture by which BMW/Olivine respond to a utility signal for a DR event that leverages "telematics embedded in the vehicle."3 A "Whisker metering system" installed on the customer's circuit breaker4 measured actual response from individual pilot vehicles. Thus, the necessary infrastructure to enable DR capability is contained in the vehicle itself. The charger does not need to be "networked" or "smart"; it simply needs to be "on" and the vehicle must be charging to participate (and not overridden by the EV driver). None of the equipment leveraged for EV DR capability in the pilot is owned by PG&E, thus demonstrating that utility ownership of charging stations is unnecessary to provide load management capabilities and dispatchable demand response. III. Workplace Charging Benefits Were Not Tested in the Pilot and Fast Charging is Unlikely to Provide Demand Response Benefits A. Any Conclusions Regarding Workplace Charging Are Entirely Speculative and Unsupported The pilot was conducted entirely on home chargers. However, data was collected concerning driving and charging behavior, and the report explains that though the majority of participants work full time (84%), only a small percentage (9%) charged at work. From these data the report concludes that "there is an opportunity to harness electric vehicle charging at the workplace," and that "there is a significant opportunity to absorb excess generation at the 1 The pilot only examined residential charging demand response. 2 Thus far, the pilot has tested only "curtailment" of EV charging, which decreases load. See, among others, Attachment 1, p. 4. 3 Attachment 2, p. 6. 4 Attachment 2, p. 4. 3 workplace."5 These conclusions are speculative and not logically persuasive. The report implies that because 62% of participants charged once a day and only 9% charged at work, there is a potential need for workplace charging. But nothing in the study results suggests an unmet need or desire for workplace charging. The results could just as easily be interpreted to mean that only 9% of participants charged at work, and only 62% charged every day, despite the fact that 79% used the i3 to commute daily, because at-home charging was more than sufficient to provide the necessary driving range for normal commuting. The study results cannot be interpreted as supporting the Joint Settlement's position that workplaces are an underserved market in PG&E's service territory deserving substantial ratepayer subsidy. No data was presented on whether or not workplace charging was available but not utilized at workplaces, or whether there is a systemic need in PG&E's territory to invest in public and workplace charging due to a lack of infrastructure. Furthermore, the conclusion that workplace charging can provide "a significant opportunity" to absorb excess daytime renewable generation is speculative, since the report did not test the response of EV drivers to signals to change charging during day time hours, nor to begin charging (increase load) during the day.6 The pilot focused on curtailment of residential charging, and the majority of the 134 DR events in the pilot occurred in the early to late evening, none from 12pm-3pm, illustrated in the figure below. 5 Attachment 2, p. 15. 6 TURN accepts the common-sense notion that workplace charging is likely to occur during daytime hours. As discussed in Section V below, the benefits of workplace EVs for renewable integration, together with the cost of building workplace infrastructure, should be compared to other methods of addressing renewable overgeneration. Further, while workplace charging may absorb excess renewable generation during limited spring afternoon hours, it could just as easily exacerbate system peak load problems during summer afternoon hours. This pilot sheds no light on the potential grid benefits or negatives of daytime workplace charging. 4 Figure 1. Demand Response Events in the BMW Pilot by Time of Day7 B. Fast Charging Is Unlikely to Provide Demand Response Benefits Though not explicitly tested in the pilot, PG&E indicates that EV charging at DCFCs should not be expected to provide renewable integration or grid benefits. In its response, PG&E states "...the relatively shorter duration of a DC Fast Charging event compared to a level 2 charging event creates a different customer impact when the timing or amount of charging is shifted."8 Put more bluntly, customers charging at public stations or at a DCFC will not likely have the patience or time to wait an extra hour to curtail charging for a DR event before getting on their way. IV. The Pilot Demonstrates EV Residential Charging May Not Add to Peak Demand or Exacerbate Renewable Integration Issues The pilot's focus on residential charging indicates that given the right incentives, EVs may charge off-peak at the residence using a simple timer built in to the vehicle. If EV charging adds to system peak demand the additional load could trigger the need for new generation capacity, imposing additional costs and potentially greenhouse gas emissions on California ratepayers. Additional on-peak load from EV charging would also increase ramping requirements as solar generation dwindles in the evening hours. 7 Data request response TURN_012_Q01_Attachment. 8 Response, p. 7. 1 1 1 1 1 1 5 4 15 93 5 6 0 20 40 60 80 100 Frequency 5 The pilot demonstrates that EVs can avoid charging at peak times with time of use (TOU) rates at the residence when drivers on a TOU rate program their EV to begin charging at off-peak times,9 and by curtailing charging at the residence in the late afternoon or evening. These results are most applicable to the multi-unit dwelling (MuD) segment of PG&E's charging infrastructure program, which the Joint Settling Parties propose encompass a minimum of 20% of the overall program. It is important to note that the pilot results thus far show that TOU rates and managed charging (curtailment) of EVs may be an avenue by which EV load can be shifted to avoid adding to peak demand- the pilot results presented do not show that EVs provide incremental renewable integration benefits. This is because EV batteries are not actually utilized to "shave" peak demand. Put another way, non-EV peak demand is not reduced at all by curtailment of charging; rather peak demand is not further increased by EV charging load when residential charging occurs off-peak. V. Grid and Renewable Integration Benefits of EVs Must be Examined In Conjunction With Other Measures to Select the Most Cost Effective Solutions Renewable integration measures, including demand response from EVs, should not be examined in silos or on a resource by resource basis. The Commission must evaluate all potential solutions that help mitigate curtailment and decrease fast ramping in the late afternoon (among the primary issues to achieve 50% renewable penetration), and select those that are most costeffective. This process is currently taking place in the long term procurement plan (LTPP) proceeding. Renewable integration solutions are numerous, and include a diversified renewable resource mix, the use of renewables over conventional generation for upward and downward reserve requirements, lowering minimum must-run requirements, storage, fast-ramping resources, increasing exports when there is an oversupply of renewable electricity, measures to increase load during daytime hours and decrease load during peak hours, among others. In addition to utilization of EVs for DR, the BMW pilot also demonstrates success in using second life batteries to achieve grid benefits during DR events. In fact, across all DR events, the vehicle pool of customer owned BMW i3s contributed, on average, approximately 22%, while the second life battery system contributed 78% of the total DR resource. If second life batteries are shown to have good performance and cost-effective lifespans after their normal 9 Attachment 2, p. 15, discusses "the high number of BMW i3 owner/participants who schedule their charging to start at or after 11 PM because they are on a time-of-use rate plan." 6 useful life in EVs, they will be a (relatively) cheap resource with which grid benefits can be achieved. TURN is interested in cost and performance data of the second life system once this is available.10 Using second life battery systems could also allow car companies to lower the upfront cost of EVs if they can count on revenues at the end of batteries' life. From a ratepayer perspective, second life batteries are a much more cost-effective way to integrate resources that can aid renewable integration and/or shave peak demand than ratepayer funding of public/workplace charging infrastructure just to achieve DR benefits. Any ratepayer benefits from workplace charging subsidies will primarily be achieved through incremental EV adoption that could not have been achieved without these subsidies. TURN notes that the incentive level paid to BMW participants is much higher than what should be reasonably expected going forward. The 96 participating BMW owners each received a minimum of $1,000 up-front, and additional payments for responding to events, up to $1,540 in total for participation in the pilot.11 The average demand response provided by the EVs was 2.6 kW.12 This means pilot participants were paid around $400/kW-year to $600/kW-year, in contrast to a maximum value of new generation capacity, estimated to cost around $200/kWyear. 13 Capacity payments to EV drivers for demand response should not be greater than the cost of new natural gas plants.14 This pilot raises equity concerns around over-paying BMW owners. The Commission should consider these issues in any future EV charging DR programs. 10 No data was presented in PG&E's report on system costs, battery degradation or physical performance (charge/discharge rates, depth of discharge, ramp rates, etc.) of the second life battery system. 11 Attachment 1, p. 9. 12 Attachment 1, p. 4. 13 $200/kW-year was the price referent line (maximum) under which DR prices were considered price competitive by Lawrence Berkeley National Lab (LBNL), based on the cost of constructing and operating a combined-cycle natural gas turbine. See LBNL, 2016 California Demand Response Potential Study, pp. 7-8. 14 TURN assumes that this pilot was likely not attempting to test the cost-effectiveness of demand response from EV cars. 7 Date: August 1, 2016 Respectfully submitted, By: __________/s/______________ Elise Torres Elise Torres, Staff Attorney THE UTILITY REFORM NETWORK 785 Market Street, Suite 1400 San Francisco, CA 94103 Phone: (415) 929-8876 ex. 308 Email: etorres@turn.org  In case of any query regarding this article or other content needs please contact: editorial@plusmediasolutions.com LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2016LANGUAGE: ENGLISHPUBLICATION-TYPE: NewswireCopyright 2016 Plus Media Solutions Private LimitedAll Rights Reserved
Page  Page  Regulatory update: California Public Utilities Commission; The Utility Reform Network, has submitted (A1502009) Comments filed by TURN - The Utility Reform Network on 08/01/2016 Conf# 100355 US Official News September 29, 2016 Thursday 